A crime fiction (also called a murder mystery) is a story that focuses on a criminal act and on a following investigation1. Usually done from a point of view of either a detective or their assistant, crime fiction spans over many types of media. Usually it takes the form of either a novel or a movie.

The first historical example of crime fiction is probably a novel The Three Apples. It was a part of One Thousand and One Nights, which is a collection of old Arabic folk tales. The novel lacked any typical features of a modern murder mystery, but still tried to set up a crime scene as a plot2 device. Other tales from this collection also describe some bits and pieces3 of actual crime investigation.

The genre became very popular in the late 19th century, with works by Edgar Allan Poe and Arthur Conan Doyle paving4 the way for more advanced stories of John Dickson Carr and Agatha Christie. Sherlock Holmes and Hercule Poirot, while being purely fictional characters, became real enough to their own fans. Over the course of many years readers were following the adventures of their beloved detectives. Holmes has appeared in 60 works of fiction in total, while Poirot in his career has made over 80 appearances.

A classic murder mystery can be viewed as a sort of a game between an author and the reader. An author sets up a murder scene, and the reader must deduce5 the culprit6 before the main detective character reveals him. A typical murder mystery leaves three questions to the reader: who has done it? How was it done? Why was it done? Answering all three questions before the main character would mean ‘beating’ the novel.

As the genre developed further, authors have developed some guidelines on writing a good murder mystery. There were many variations of such rules, but in a nutshell7 it all boiled down to a novel being fair to its reader. For example, a good novel had to introduce the culprit early in the story as someone who a reader would know about. All clues should be available to the reader the same way they are available for the protagonists. There were also some very strict rules on the usage of poison and other similar substances, as the reader should have been able to unravel8 the story without any sort of special knowledge.

One of the most iconic form of a murder fiction is the locked-room mystery, which describes seemingly an impossible crime (for example, a corpse would be hidden inside an empty room that is locked from the inside) and challenges the reader to find a plausible way to explain it and eventually find the perpetrator9.

Another type of murder novels revolves around a closed circle of suspects. These stories usually have many colorful characters, each of them with their own agenda10, and the main challenge for a reader lies in pointing out the single guilty party while sparing the rest of possible culprits.

The murder mystery is still a very popular genre nowadays, and the classics of it are routinely adapted into films, videogames and some other forms of fan fiction.
